# Wood and Steel

Wood and Steel is a train game for 1-6 players of growth and expansion in the age of the steam engine, starting in 1830 and running to about 1940.

Each player plays as a railroad owner, starting from a small two-city run in the eastern United States. In the beginning of the game, the country is scattered with small railroads owned both by the players and independent companies. Players pick up and deliver commodities to fulfill both private and market contracts generated randomly by the app.

Each turn, players can choose to buy engines, lay track, buy independent railroads, fulfill contracts, bid for going first, and build buildings. Some cities will have a greater likelihood to grow, but that is not etched in stone. Cities that get deliveries will be more likely to grow.

## A note to AI agents

This document describes a work in progress. The code in this project implements some of the app functionality described, but not all of it.

## Implementation

Wood and Steel is played with physical tabletop components and a web app.

### Tabletop components

The centerpiece physical component is a map board that covers the US and southern Canada. There are also player boards, cards, and counters to keep track of per-player information that is not tracked in the app.

### App

The app is responsible for all the random behavior in the game—think virtual decks of cards—and tracks some elements of player progress. The goal is that players keep track of the things that are interesting and fun (e.g. their track), while the grunt work is delegated to the app (e.g. generating a random contract based on board state).

#### Global state information

* List of players  
* Phase of the game  
* Current player  
* Market contracts available  
* Independent railroads  
  * name  
  * cities and segments  
  * price (if it’s not deterministic)  
* Metadata (not needed for now because there’s only one game)  
  * game unique ID  
  * start timestamp  
  * current mode (e.g. player setup)  
  * current turn number

#### Per-player state information

* Their name  
* Active cities: starting cities and all cities they have fulfilled contracts for  
* Contracts they have fulfilled  
* Private Contract being held  
* Whether a Market Contract is being held, and the contract if so

## Object of the game and scoring

To be the player with the most railroad ties. Railroad ties are awarded these ways during gameplay:

**Contract fulfillment**: Each delivery is worth 1, 2 or 3 ties depending on whether the delivery is in the same section of the map, to an adjacent section of the map or to a non-adjacent section of the map.

**Connection bonuses** are generated by the app and give railroad ties for connecting certain locations (i.e. East Coast to West Coast) or specific cities. The value in railroad ties is based on the length of track required.

**Commodity bonuses** are granted based on the breadth and depth of a railroad.

* The breadth bonus is based on the number of different commodities a railroad has delivered. The first eight are worth 1 railroad tie each, the second four are worth 2 ties, and all additional commodities are worth 3 railroad ties.  
* The depth bonus is for the number of times beyond the first delivery a railroad delivers a particular commodity. This is a cumulative railroad tie bonus equal to one plus the number of times you have delivered your most delivered commodity.  

**Monopoly bonuses** are granted when a player connects track to all cities that provide a monopoly-eligible commodity. The bonus grants either 1 or 2 railroad ties.

### End of game scoring

When a player collects 30 railroad ties or more, the game is over.

In addition to railroad ties scored during the game, these bonuses are awarded:

**Regional dominance:** A player who has connected to at least half the cities in a region, has a Regional Office, and is connected to more regional cities than any other player or independent railroad is awarded 4 railroad ties.

## Set Up

On the tabletop, each player chooses a color and starts with a John Bull engine, $10,000, and all the track sections of their color.

The app then places independent railroads, a random number of them depending on the number of players. They are all 1 segment long, at least 2 segments away from any of the possible starting cities, and at least 1 segment away from each other.

In the app, each player chooses a starting position by ranking their top three choices from the list below. The app resolves their choices. It then tells each player their starting position and Private Contract.

Two-player options:

* Quebec City - Montreal
* Boston - Portland ME  
* Philadelphia - New York  
* Washington - Philadelphia  
* Raleigh - Norfolk  
* Charleston - Savannah

Players start the game with one railroad segment. The app decides the starting player based on who received the starting least desirable position on the map. We may also balance the starting capital, etc. to equalize the starting placement.

Then, based on the starting positions of the players, the app will generate Private Contracts for each player. Market Contracts for the game will be created once a player is eligible to use one. At this point, game play starts.

App generates a starting Private Contract for each player. First turn contracts operate similarly to any private contract, but have slightly different rules for how they are generated.

Player chooses in which of their two connected cities they want to put their engine.

App places independent railroads:

* Independent railroads start in any city at least 2 segments away from any of the possible starting cities.  
* The app will place them to fill in the most spacious areas so there is a rough balance of open space for all players.
* At the start of the game, there will be a total of 9 to 12 total railroads (player and independent).

## Contracts

Fulfilling a contract is the way players make money. Each player always has a Private Contract and may have a Market Contract.

Contracts represent a request to deliver a commodity to a specific city. Each contract has three parts: a commodity, a destination city, and a monetary reward received upon delivery. Players fulfill a contract by running one of their trains to a city that supplies the named commodity, then running that train to the destination city.

The app generates contracts. Cities with higher values are more likely to be destinations, and they will always be for commodities that are close to the players’ existing rail networks. The reward value of the contract is based on the distance from the destination to the nearest city that produces the commodity.

### Types of contracts

**Private** Contracts represent requests for the services of a specific railroad. Private Contracts belong to one player and can only be fulfilled by that player. When a Private Contract is fulfilled, the app offers the player two new contracts; the player must decide which one they will take next.

**Market** Contracts are offered in the app. Players who own a Mogul engine or better can claim a Market Contract when they pick up the commodity in that contract. Claiming that contract takes it off the market, removing it from the tableau of available Market Contracts and triggering the generation of a new one. Market Contracts are always at least 9k.

## Turn actions

On a player’s turn, they may do one or two actions. No action other than running trains may be done more than once per turn, and each engine in your fleet can only be run once per turn.

* Run trains  
* Build track  
* Buy an engine  
* Merge with an independent railroad  
* Go first the next round  
* Borrow money  
* Repay debt  
* Buy an upgrade  
* Discard and draw a new private contract  
* Pass on taking one of your two actions.

### Run trains

Running your trains is the way you pick up commodities and deliver them to fulfill contracts. This action allows you to move one or both of your engines along the tracks in your railway network up to the number of segments shown on its engine’s card. The length of the segments does not matter, just the total number traveled.

#### Picking up a commodity

A train can either be empty or loaded with one commodity. A train can pick up a commodity when it is run through a city that supplies that commodity. This does not take any actions and the train may continue moving up to its full distance.

#### Fulfilling a contract

If a train carrying a commodity goes to a city with an open contract for that commodity, the player may fulfill that contract. When a contract is fulfilled, the train’s movement ends in that city.

To fulfill a contract, follow these steps.

##### Step 1. Collect payment and pay debt service

Collect the money value of the contract, minus any debt service that is due.

* No debt service is due while the player has only fulfilled contracts in the Eastern region.  
* When a player fulfills their first contract in the Central region, they pay one-time debt service of $1,000 per $5,000 borrowed.  
* When a player fulfills their first contract in the Western region, they pay debt service with that delivery and **every** delivery after that, regardless of destination. Debt service is the same: $1,000 per $5,000 borrowed.

If the debt service is greater than the contract’s value, the player must pay the difference. If a player does not have enough money to make this payment, they go bankrupt after finishing the Run a Train action. See [Bankruptcy](#bankruptcy) for more details.

##### Step 2. Collect railroad ties

Collect the railroad tie value of the contract. If they are the first player to fulfill a contract to a West Coast city, they also get 3 railroad ties. Players who subsequently fulfill a contract to a West Coast city get 2 railroad ties.

If a player has gone bankrupt fulfilling a contract, they earn no railroad ties.

##### Step 3\. Draw a new contract

The player taps the Fulfilled button on the contract in the app. If a Private Contract was fulfilled, they will be offered two new private contracts and must choose one of them. If a Market Contract was fulfilled, a new market contract will be generated.

### Build track

Lay rails between two locations by paying the appropriate amount and laying their colored piece on that section of the board. A player may build up to two segments of track per turn.

| Length | Cost | Mountainous | Parallel | Parallel \+ mountainous |
| :---: | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| 1 | $2,000 | $4,000 | $3,000 | $6,000 |
| 2 | $3,000 | $6,000 | $4,000 | $8,000 |
| 3 | $4,000 | $8,000 | $5,000 | $10,000 |
| 4 | $5,000 | $10,000 | $6,000 | $12,000 |
| 5 | $6,000 | $12,000 | $7,000 | $14,000 |

#### Parallel tracks

Parallel track is possible on every track segment on the board. The second track costs an additional $1,000 per segment. If it’s mountainous track, the cost is doubled.

### Buy an engine

Engines dictate how many segments your trains can move with the Run Trains action. Each engine card shows the distance in segments it can travel, any game repercussions that happen as a result of its purchase, and the cost to buy the engine.

Each player can own up to 2 engines. The trade-in value of an engine—half the purchase price, rounded down to the nearest $1,000 ($0 for the John Bull, which must be traded in for the American)—may be applied to purchasing a new engine. If you choose not to trade in and already own two engines, you must discard one of your engines when you buy a new one.

You can only buy an engine one level higher than the best one you currently own.

To purchase an engine, you pay the cost as printed on the card and place the card in front of you. If you already have the limit of engines you are allowed at this point in the game, you must replace one of the old engines with the one just purchased, putting it in that city. Remove the old engine card from the play area in front of you.

#### Engine stats

| Name | Distance | Cost | Notes |
| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| 2-4-0 John Bull | 1 | free at start of game |  |
| 4-4-0 American | 2 | $5,000 |  |
| 2-6-0 Mogul | 3 | $7,000 | After buying, player can fulfill market contracts |
| 2-8-0 Consolidation | 3 | $10,000 | After buying, Service Yard is available to all players for purchase |
| 4-6-0 Camelback | 4 | $13,000 |  |
| 2-6-2 Prairie | 5 | $16,000 |  |
| 4-6-2 Pacific | 7 | $20,000 |  |
| 2-8-2 Mikado | 8 | $24,000 |  |
| 4-8-2 Mountain | 9 | $28,000 | Earn an additional $1,000 per segment when a contract is fulfilled |
| 4-6-6-4 Challenger | 11 | $32,000 | Gain 2 railroad ties at end of game Earn an additional $1,000 per segment when a contract is fulfilled |

### Merge with an independent railroad

Independent railroads cost $3,000 per segment until the western section of the map is broken. Then they cost $4,000 per segment of track.

### Go first next round

This allows you to first. Once a player has chosen this, no other player can choose it this round.

### Borrow money

Players may borrow money in $5,000 increments. The game does not impose any limit to how much money can be borrowed.

### Repay debt

Pay back $5,000 or $10,000 of debt. Players cannot pay their debt down any lower than $15,000.

### Buy an upgrade

Upgrades support and augment the running of the railroad. The parenthetical comments like "early" and "mid" reflect when in the game players are likely to get the most value from the upgrade.

#### Service Yard – $10,000 (early)

The service yard maintains all the engines of a railroad to keep them in top running shape. Your 2-8-0 Consolidation and better engines can move one space farther when taking the Run Trains action.

#### Upgraded Stations – $10,000 (early)

Make your stations more attractive and comfortable by adding things like hotels, restaurants, storage facilities and post offices. Receive an additional $3,000 for each delivery.

#### Hub – $15,000 (early-mid)

Place your Hub marker on a city connected to your railway network. In the app, indicate your hub city. A city can only be a hub for one player.

* You may order engine designs one engine ahead of your current choice by spending an additional $5,000.  
* You will be offered 3 choices of private contracts instead of two after fulfilling your private contract.  
* The hub city is more likely to be offered in private contracts. (Designer note: The hub city’s value is raised by the total value of all directly connected cities. If two hubs are in neighboring cities, neither gets the hub bonus city value for the other hub.)  
* Building track costs $1,000 less per segment within two links of a hub.

#### Timetable – $15,000 (early-mid)

When using the Run a Train action to fulfill a contract, your train can continue moving up to their total maximum number of segments instead of stopping in the contract’s destination city.

#### Roundhouse – $10,000 (mid)

The roundhouse allows you to combine the movement of engines so that you can reach your destination more efficiently. One of your engines must be free of a delivery. The first engine carries the commodity as far as it can and then transfers the commodity to the second engine. Move the second engine **no more than 4 segments** from where it currently is to the location of the finished movement of the first engine. The second engine will then move normally from the location of the first engine. You may use this ability every time you take the Run Trains action, even if you do it twice in one turn.

#### Employment Office – $10,000 (mid)

Build three segments of track with the Build Track action.

#### Track Maintenance – $10,000 (mid)

Snow Blower engines clear tracks of snow, allowing other engines to operate normally. When one player purchases the Snow Blower, all other players without a Snow Blower move one segment fewer with each of their Run Trains actions. An engine’s distance cannot be reduced below 1\.

#### Railyard \- $10,000 (mid)

Railyards allow the short-term storage of commodities. When building a railyard, place one of your Railyard tokens on a city connected to your railway network. This city now supplies you with all commodities available within two segments. A city can only have one railyard.

#### Regional Office – $20,000

If you have connections to at least half (rounded down) of the cities in a region and no one else has connections in that region, you can build a Regional Office. This gives you the benefits of regional dominance for that region.

#### Commodities Exchange Office – $20,000

If your railway network is connected to all the cities that provide a commodity that can be monopolized, gain the benefits of a monopoly in that commodity.

### Discard and draw a new Private Contract

In the app, discard your current private contract and get a new one from among two new choices (or three if you have purchased the Hub upgrade).

## End of round

After all players have taken a turn, the round is over. Tap the End Round button in the app.

### Independent railroads expand

The app will tell you how each of the independent railroads are expanding. Put the corresponding track segments on the central map.

Independent railroads give you the chance to rapidly expand your company through mergers.

In the early stages of railroads in North America, there were thousands of small railroads. The New York Central, for example, was one of the most important railroads in the early stage of the Steam Age, and it came from the merger of twelve smaller railroads.

### Monopolies

Railroads were often built around transporting certain commodities. If the commodities were delivered in large enough quantities, they became part of the financial backbone of a railroad. (Designer note: To reflect this in gameplay, we've decided to include monopolies as part of how you build your railroad. The intention is that not all players will have monopolies at game end.)

A player gets a monopoly when their track connects to all cities providing a commodity available in 4, 5, or 6 cities and they have a Commodities Exchange Office dedicated to that commodity. Having a monopoly immediately awards that player 1 or 2 railroad ties. It also increases the chance that the monopolized commodity will be in the private contracts offered to a player after they make a delivery to a city within one hop of a city with that commodity. (The probability distribution for the other commodities is the same, within the remaining odds.)

Only the first player who fulfills the requirement can have a monopoly in a commodity.

#### Monopoly Size

| \# cities with the commodity | Commodities | Railroad ties awarded | Chance of commodity in a private contract |
| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| 4 | iron ore, lead, textiles | 2 | 40% |
| 5 | grain | 3 | 50% |
| 6 | coal, imports, machinery, wood | 4 | 60% |

Maybe have a **Terminal** building to upgrade the value of a particular commodity?

## Regional Dominance

Regional Dominance may occur when a railroad connects to five cities in a region. If they build a Regional Office (20k), they may take regional dominance for the region. This benefits the railroad in two ways:

1. The railroad receives two Railroad Ties at the end of the game.  
2. For the rest of the game, the railroad receives an additional contract for commodities from this region.

## Bankruptcy

If a player can’t pay debt service when it needs to, they enter bankruptcy. Immediately after finishing their Run a Train action, the player must do the following.

1. Return 5 railroad ties to the supply.  
2. Sell track segments to the bank equal to the shortfall plus a penalty of $5,000 more for the bank to continue to handle their remaining debt. The track sells at the same prices which it cost to build them. The player chooses what pieces are to be sold.  
3. Said track is then available for auction to the other players starting at normal rates and raising by a minimum of $1,000 for each bid. The various pieces of track are sold off one at a time. The first player to the left chooses one of the pieces and makes a bid if they so choose (second track piece auction starts with the second player to the left and so on). If a player passes, they may not reenter the bidding. The highest bidder wins the auction. Players can only bid if they have enough cash on hand to make a bid. As each piece is auctioned, the segment of railroad is changed to the color of the new owner. If any pieces of track are not purchased, they become part of any independent railroad that is connected. If there are no connected independent railroads, the track is removed from the board.
